An orbit is the gravitationally curved trajectory of a celestial body. This can be seen
as the trajectory of a planet around a star, or a natural satellite around a planet.
Planets and satellites follow elliptic orbits, where the center of mass is orbited at a
focal point of the ellipse [35].
One way of defining the orbit of a satellite, is by defining it as a Kepler orbit, which
contains the 6 Keplerian elements. These elements are listed and defined in Table
2.1, and visualized in Figure 2.1. With the use of the 6 Keplerian elements, any
orbit can be defined and analysed.
Parameter Definition Symbol
Eccentricity  Shape of the ellipse,elongation compared to a cicle e
Semi-major axis Mean of periapsis and apoapsis distance, apoapsis being the a
Inclination Vertical tilt of the ellipse i
Longitude Horizontal tilt of the ellipse W
Argument of periapsis Orientation of the ellipse w
True anomaly Position of the orbiting body along the ellipse at a specific time, described at epoch (t0) v
Table 2.1: Keplerian elements of an orbit

Altitude
There are different altitude classifications for an orbit. Some of these are Low
Earth Orbit (LEO), Medium Earth Orbit (MEO), and Geostationary Orbit (GEO),
where the orbit have an altitude below 2000km, from 2000km to 35786km, and at
35786km to Earth respectively, shown in Figure 2.2. The orbit period is around
100 minutes in LEO, 12 hours in MEO, and 24 hours in GEO. This means, that
a satellite in GEO has the same angular velocity as Earth, whereas a satellite in
LEO has an angular velocity around 14 times greater. Due to the gravitational pull
from Earth, the closer a satellite is to Earth, the higher speed is required to stay in
orbit. Combining this with aerial drag and solar pressure, a satellite in orbit will
lose altitude over time. This is accounted for with a propulsion system, which is
described in section 2.2.
As shown in Table 2.1, the semi-major axis of an orbit describes the altitude
with respect to the center of Earth, instead of the distance to the surface of Earth.
For instance, if a satellite has a semi-major axis of 6928km and an eccentricity of 0,
it is placed in a circular LEO at around 550km altitude.
2.1.2 Attitude
The attitude of a satellite is the orientation with respect to an inertial frame of reference,
for instance placed at the center of Earth or nearby objects. The orientation
of a satellite is computed by an orbit frame and a body frame. Controlling the attitude
is an essential aspect of an satellite in orbit, due to actions requiring a certain
attitude to work, but can also be used to optimise the effectiveness of a task [29].
An example of this, is a satellite which antennas have to be aligned parallel to the
surface of Earth in order to communicate with ground stations, or even tilting the
antenna to increase the area of coverage.
Attitude control is not in the scope of this project, and will therefore not be investigated
further.
2.1.3 Constellation
When multiple satellites are working together as a system, for example to provide
global or near-global signal coverage, the satellites can be defined as a satellite constellation.
This is achieved by having a single or more orbital planes and ground
stations distributed globally. For a constellation in a single orbital plane, each
satellite will have connection to different ground stations at different times, and
the satellites will have the same true anomaly only with a constant time lag. From
a user’s point of view, when considering global coverage, at least 1 satellite can be
communicated with at all times, no matter where the user is located.
By having a constellation with a single orbital plane, specific regions can have
permanent coverage, and by having multiple orbital planes, permanent global coverage
can be achieved. Depending on the design of the constellation and the satellites,
multiple orbital planes can also be utilized to cover only specific regions.
A method of designing a constellation, is the Walker Delta Pattern, which designs
the satellites to have similar orbits, eccentricity, and inclination. This is done,
so that any perturbations will affect the satellites similarly, and by having circular
orbits, the altitude is constant.
The Walker Constellation has the notation:
i : t/p/ f (2.1)
where i is the inclination, t is the total number of satellites, p is the number
of equally spaced planes, and f is the relative spacing between the satellites in
adjacent planes. An example of this, is the Galileo Navigation System, which is a
56:24/3/1 constellation [40]. This means that the system consists of 24 satellites
in 3 planes, inclined at 56 degrees, as shown in Figure 2.3.